hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD
many of the issues in pathological
narcissism and NPD involve difficulty
perceiving the difference between self
and other in short narcissists struggle
with boundaries but they aren't the only
ones many of the comments that I receive
on this channel are from individuals who
have been in dysfunctional or abusive
relationships and who have struggled to
set and maintain adaptive boundaries so
today's episode is for both sides of the
aisle I'll be providing a definition of
interpersonal boundaries I'll be
discussing the reasons why boundaries
are important for mental health and for
healthy relationships I'll be discussing
the problems with boundaries that often
occur in pathological narcissism and
I'll be providing some basic tips for
assertive Behavior so let's get started
[Music]
the ability to set and maintain adaptive
boundaries is a foundational skill and a
central issue in all relationships
including those that involve
pathological narcissism
boundaries allow us to communicate
effectively to get our needs met and to
protect ourselves from mistreatment and
from abuse but what is a boundary simply
put a boundary is a limit set by you or
by someone else that protects something
of value
imagine for a moment what would happen
if your home didn't have a front door it
wouldn't take long before the intrusion
of weather bugs animals and even other
people would make your space unlivable
your home's front door is a barrier it's
a limit it's a boundary that protects
you and your belongings it's what allows
you to have things of value
nothing functions without boundaries
your home needs a door your body needs
skin your nation needs laws and your
relationships need rules mutually agreed
upon limits concerning what is
permissible and what is not
we are each entitled to set limits that
feel good to us and that reflect our
personal boundaries some simple examples
might include the right not to have our
bodies touched without our consent the
right not to be spoken to in an abusive
or a demeaning Manner and the right to
manage our own friendships and finances
when discussing boundaries I'm sometimes
reminded of Goldilocks and the Three
Bears in that tale Goldilocks encounters
three versions of everything in the
Bear's home one version is too small too
soft or too cold one version is too
large too hard or too hot and one
version is just right
like the things in the Bear's home
boundaries often come in three versions
two porous too inflexible and just right
porous boundaries are like a door that
doesn't close all the way or one that
doesn't lock the barrier between inside
and outside is too permeable
those with porous boundaries may not
feel entitled to a private space in
their lives they may feel conflicted
about setting and enforcing limits on
loved ones behaviors they may allow
themselves to be taken for granted taken
advantage of manipulated or controlled
by someone else they may allow someone
else to control their finances dictate
who they can be friends with or to
dismiss and devalue their thoughts and
feelings sometimes people with porous
boundaries transgress on the boundaries
of other people as well they may feel
entitled to all of a person's time or
attention they may think it's okay to
invade their partner's personal or
private space or they may Place demands
on a partner to reveal every single
thought inside that person's head they
may not respect locked or closed doors
they may secretly go through their
partner's phone or social media accounts
and they may reveal intimate details
about a partner to friends or co-workers
without that person's consent
basically people with porous boundaries
are unable to protect what's important
and they make it difficult or impossible
for others to protect what's important
to them
now in contrast to porous boundaries
inflexible boundaries can also be
problematic they're like a door with
five deadbolts and an armed guard
healthy relationships involve compromise
and negotiation from all involved
parties if one person is unwilling or
unable to make reasonable compromises
then it places an unfair burden on the
other person or persons to make more
than their fair share of compromises to
compensate examples of inflexible
boundaries might include rigid ideas
about cleanliness unwillingness to allow
spontaneity the tendency to take things
personally and to hold grudges being too
quick to cut people out of your life
expecting that everyone will just
magically know and adjust to your
personal preferences and attempting to
control what others do say think or feel
inflexible interpersonal boundaries can
also look like an inability or an
unwillingness to get close to other
people emotionally
inflexible boundaries keep too much of
the world out of your home the air gets
stale you begin to run out of food the
utilities are gradually shut off you
protect what's important but it comes at
the cost of physical mental or emotional
health
as in the story of Goldilocks there is a
level of boundaries that is just right
we call these adaptive boundaries and
they're anchored in your personal values
but they also respect the values of
other people
adaptive boundaries consist of a
combination of strength and flexibility
they're firmly rooted in the rights and
the values of the individual they can
withstand heavy stress and strain but
they're also flexible enough to adapt to
the given situation and they can be
moved when appropriate
okay so that's a primer on the concept
of boundaries and why they're important
as I've discussed in previous episodes
individuals with pathological narcissism
and NPD have difficulty recognizing and
respecting the boundaries of other
people pathological narcissism involves
deficits in self-image that require the
individual to seek out external
infusions of self-esteem
and this process requires a constant
breaking down of personal and
psychological boundaries
if someone is trying to take something
inside of you and use it to sustain
something inside of them that is by
definition a boundaryless process but
the lack of boundaries in pathological
narcissism and NPD is often much more
profound involving a fundamental absence
of differentiation between self and
others this absence of a differentiated
self is due to developmental deficits
that extend back into childhood when
we're first forming a separate identity
psychologically it's thought that
infants rely on a feeling of merger with
caregivers to sustain their fragile
experience of self they need to be
suspended in a kind of ongoing reverie
of psychological and emotional Oneness
or Unity with caregivers that helps to
ameliorate the lack of internal cohesion
and terrifying self-states that are
thought to dominate the first years of
life
the analyst Donald winnicott called this
suspended reverie going on being
winnicott thought that young children
must be allowed to fully soak up this
subjective merger with caregivers before
they could begin to emerge as a separate
psychological being
in winnicott's model successful
emergence as a separate self was only
possible if the child had accumulated
good enough experience that makes being
a separate self tolerable
Margaret Mahler termed this process of
emerging as a separate self
individuation
individuation is the process of
separating psychologically from
caregivers it involves building an
identity that is yours that's based on
your personal experience and a sense of
an inner world that is bounded and
separate from the inner worlds of those
around you for children who have had
good enough experience that is who have
felt adequately supported and cared for
adequately seen and understood
adequately held and suspended both
physically and emotionally in Blissful
merger with caregivers and who have been
allowed to emerge from that reverie at
an organic and natural pace the process
of individuating or separating
psychologically can be one of increasing
competence confidence and pride in the
discovery of One's Own abilities however
a lot can go wrong on the path to
forming a separate self the nascent self
is fragile and wobbly when it first
begins to individuate it's easily
overwhelmed and easily frustrated it's
full of unrealistic expectations about
itself and it's subject to polarized
self-images that are either all good or
all bad young children may expect
themselves to be perfect they may have
totally unrealistic ideas about their
own capabilities or they may vacillate
between grandiose self-experience and
utter loss of self
we must gradually develop a self-image
that is flexible stable and realistic we
do this during a period of development
called the reproachma subphase
Margaret Mahler first identified this
sub-phase of individuation and she
noticed that young children would
blissfully run away from their
caregivers when they went to play
delighting in their independence and
their developing capabilities however at
some point they would begin to turn back
just to make sure that their caregiver
was still available to help them if
needed
Mauler conjectured that this reassurance
seeking had profound developmental
implications
children in this phase exist in a state
of hyperpermeable boundaries they seek
Independence in individuation but they
still rely on the safety of a caregiver
to sustain their sort of wobbly
self-image
the world is a big and a scary place and
they've begun to come up against their
own physical emotional and mental
limitations
being able to access their caregivers
strength positivity and encouragement
allows them to continue on the path
toward independent selfhood in mahler's
model some individuals get stuck in the
reproachment subphase of individuation
they remain suspended between emerged
self and a separate self
and this level of object relations is
sometimes referred to as the borderline
range of functioning which is different
by the way than borderline personality
disorder
individuals in the borderline range of
functioning struggle with boundaries
they have extreme difficulty generating
stable moderate and realistic images of
themselves and of other people like the
children in mahler's studies they seek
Independence but quickly become
overwhelmed
their images of self and others are
often polarized into categories of
perfection and worthlessness they often
send mixed messages that reflect deep
ambivalence about being a separate self
they may fluctuate between states of
essential boundarylessness where they
seem to seek complete merger with other
people and states of extreme or even
forceful separation where they seem to
hate other people and view them as
intrusive or controlling
individuals in this range of function
are also frequently confused about their
feelings and intentions the self is not
developed enough at this stage to
tolerate its own internal contradictions
so it relies instead on reality
distorting defenses like splitting or
denial the underdeveloped or damaged
self is also not able to tolerate making
mistakes or being wrong due to internal
polarizations
if the self isn't perfect then it must
be worthless and if it's worthless then
what is the point of even being a self
in the first place
these lines of thought cause collapse
into depression anxiety hopelessness
shame and even suicidality there's also
often a tendency to experience very
powerful emotions that quickly overwhelm
The Fragile self and sort of spill over
onto and even into other people this is
called projection and projective
identification
now individuals in the borderline range
of functioning rely on these and other
defenses because they blur the line
between self and other allowing them to
disown thoughts and feelings that their
fragile self-structure can't tolerate
but the permeable boundaries that allow
projection also allow something called
introjection which is where the thoughts
feelings and perceptions of other people
are experienced as coming from inside
the self and this is the mechanism that
enables self-object experiences
individuals in the borderline range are
able to soak up the ways that other
people regard them as though those
feelings were generated by their own
self if they feel idealized it's as
though they were generating the
perception themselves individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD rely on
this phenomenon to generate self-esteem
however just as they can sort of soak up
positive idealizing feelings about the
self they can also soak up negative
feelings and this results in a kind kind
of hypersensitivity to shame and
humiliation and this is why people with
NPD seem so sensitive to the slightest
negative perception about themselves
such perceptions are not experienced as
the mere opinions of other people their
experience as facts about the self that
must be fought with neutralized or
expelled now it's important to remember
that these issues with boundaries affect
anyone organized at the borderline level
that includes people with NPD but also
people with other personality disorders
like borderline personality disorder
dependent personality disorder paranoid
personality disorder and
obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder as well as others this is why
there appear to be so many commonalities
between all of these disorders they all
involve functioning in the borderline
range with a separation of self and
others is incomplete and boundaries are
hyperpermeable
different personality Styles will cope
with these issues in different ways
paranoid personalities rely more heavily
on projection and externalization
individuals with BPD struggle more with
issues pertaining to merger and
separation while individuals with NPD
struggle more with maintaining a stable
positive and realistic self-image but
all utilize common borderline level
defenses like projection projective
identification denial splitting and
acting out the main differences have to
do with the core schemas around which
these issues tend to occur NPD should
not be synonymous with abuse violence or
evil someone with NPD can certainly do
those things they can certainly behave
in harmful or abusive ways toward other
people
but that in no way represents the heart
of the disorder
the heart of NPD is an unstable
self-image and deficits in coping with
the issues that are caused by having an
unstable self-image in the borderline
range of functioning those ways of
coping involve a constant Erasure of
boundaries in the pursuit of reassurance
just like the young child looking over
their shoulder to make sure their
caregiver is still there still watching
still believing in them and their
abilities individuals with NPD are
constantly seeking external infusions of
self-esteem and periodic return to
unindividuated states with those around
them in which the other person's
positive regard can become the
narcissist's positive regard now all
that being said boundary erasing can
have really negative consequences
the pressure to prop up the fragile self
and defend it against perceived threats
whether internal or external can cause
people with NPD to engage in controlling
Behavior devaluing behavior and at times
cruel or even abusive Behavior no one
should tolerate mistreatment or abuse
it's incumbent upon each of us to set
and maintain our own boundaries
each of us is entitled to decide how we
want to be treated we're entitled to ask
for that treatment and we're entitled to
leave when someone refuses to treat us
in the ways that we want to be treated
I used to run a therapy group that
discussed boundaries and assertiveness
and people would come in so confused
about what constitutes an effective
boundary how to communicate about their
boundaries and how to be assertive when
their boundaries were crossed so here's
what I would tell them
first what's an effective boundary an
effective boundary is one that you can
State simply and clearly examples
include things like I don't want to be
yelled at I don't want to be touched
like that
want to be treated with kindness and
respect
importantly your right to set a boundary
ends where another person's rights begin
you're not entitled to control anyone
else's Behavior you're not entitled to
make anyone feel a certain way about you
you're not entitled to touch anyone
else's body or control their movements
interests friends or beliefs
two how should you communicate your
boundaries well there's no perfect way
to communicate boundaries different
people respond differently to different
communication Styles it's not on you to
quote make anyone understand your
boundaries you can't make anyone else
respect your boundaries all you can do
is State your boundaries as clearly and
unapologetically as possible
and then be willing to follow through to
protect them
if someone crosses a boundary you get to
decide what you will do about it maybe
you give a warning maybe you decide to
leave the relationship and never look
back maybe you decide to involve the
authorities it's up to you you can't
force people to respect your boundaries
but you can absolutely follow through in
protecting them your ability to protect
your boundaries ends where another
person's rights begin
physically or emotionally harming
someone because they crossed a boundary
is not protecting your boundary it's
violating theirs if someone is hurting
you get help leave the situation and
then take necessary steps to protect
yourself in the future
three how to be assertive like
boundaries assertiveness ranges from too
little to too much
too little assertiveness is called
passive Behavior too much assertiveness
is called aggressive behavior the
easiest way to think about assertiveness
is to think about rights each of us has
rights and those rights typically extend
to the boundaries of our skin and
sometimes beyond for example when it
comes to property or dependence for whom
we have legal responsibility
passive behavior is when you allow
someone to violate your rights examples
might include not speaking up for
yourself or your needs because you're
afraid of offending or disappointing
someone
now on the other end of the spectrum
aggressive behavior involves protecting
your rights while violating the rights
of someone else examples might include
verbally berating or physically
assaulting someone because they offended
you invading someone else's space
because you want more for yourself
Etc
now right in the middle between passive
and aggressive behavior is where we find
assertiveness assertiveness prioritizes
both your rights and the rights of the
other person examples of assertive
Behavior include you know politely but
firmly informing the server at a
restaurant that your order is incorrect
kindly but firmly asking someone to
lower their voice when speaking to you
or respectfully declining an invitation
that you don't wish to attend now the
beautiful thing about assertiveness is
that you never have to quote win a fight
or argument you never have to be proven
right you don't have to somehow get the
other person to agree with you all you
have to do is State your boundary and be
willing to follow through if the other
person doesn't respect it
perhaps that involves asking to speak to
the manager if your server refuses to
fix their mistake
it might involve excusing yourself from
a conversation if the person refuses to
lower their voice it could also involve
more extreme responses you get to decide
what's appropriate and so long as you
respect the rights of those around you
you can't go wrong don't like the way a
partner treats you tell them in a firm
but respectful way and if they don't
listen you can leave you can call a
friend for support you can call the
police for help no one is entitled to
force you to be in a relationship in
which you're unhappy and if they're
attempting to do so then you need to
find help assertiveness often looks like
seeking support engaging in self-care
asking for what you want or need and
walking away when the other person
decides not to respect your request
assertiveness almost never looks like
arguing fighting hitting manipulating
coercing taking or hurting someone in
any way if you're confused about
assertive Behavior boundaries or your
rights then you need to seek support
call your friend talk to a therapist
speak to a lawyer consult with your
doctor go to the police no one should
construe anything I'm saying in this or
any other episode as an appeal to remain
in a situation or a relationship in
which you are unhappy or you're being
mistreated
when I talk about having compassion for
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD I'm talking to Society at large to
the public and to mental health
professionals and online personalities
who make a living spreading stigma and
selling scandalizing representations of
this particular form of mental illness
I'm never talking to individuals in
personal relationships with someone who
is harming or mistreating them I simply
can't say that clearly enough if anyone
is hurting you you should absolutely 100
percent seek support
if you're someone who identifies as
struggling with pathological narcissism
or NPD moving toward greater Health
means developing a more stable realistic
and positive self-image it means
progressively learning to tolerate the
distortions and self-perception that
characterize these issues without
relying so much on disruptive or
maladaptive ways of coping working to
more reliably see the separation between
self and others is a great way to
practice all of these skills
in my previous video on narcissistic
rage I discussed not taking things
personally
recognize that other people are their
own centers of emotional gravity and
their thoughts feelings and behaviors
have almost everything to do with them
and almost nothing to do with you
well the same goes for you you are your
own being your own self
take ownership of the deficits inside of
yourself that cause you to struggle with
self-esteem
recognize that these deficits reside in
you and that no one else is obligated to
help you with them in any way
practice asking for reassurance and
emotional support in ways that are not
boundary Crossing don't pressure or
coerce anyone to help you with your
insecurities just ask if they're busy or
unable to do so then you might need to
try something else
see if you can find something that is
inherently non-destructive and that
involves treating yourself and other
people with kindness and respect take a
long walk write in a journal express
yourself through ART lose yourself in a
game or a movie enjoy a special treat or
dinner scream into a pillow go to the
gym see if you can find a way to make
space for your internal experience
however upsetting or distressing it
might be without trying to get rid of it
externalize it or take it out on
yourself or anyone else
you are a separate self
you're flawed and imperfect
just like the rest of us you're one of
more than eight billion such selves on
planet Earth and there's no requirement
that you be anything more than exactly
who you are in this exact moment feeling
whatever you feel
you're separate yes
but you're not alone
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions or suggestions
for future episodes and if you leave a
comment try to be respectful one of the
focuses of this episode is tolerating
distressed states of mind and holding
unwanted feelings without abusing other
people and that applies to everyone not
just those who struggle with
pathological narcissism
and until next time take good care
[Music]